## Section 1: Introduction


### Peculiarities of electricity[^1]

[^1]: Aghdam, R. 2006. [_Electricity Industry Reform in Australia: Rationale, Impacts, Challenges_](https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/10453/20323/2/02Whole.pdf). PhD Thesis.

Electricity as a commodity or service has some special characteristics and peculiarities that contribute to its importance in every economy. While electricity is generated and controlled, it is one of the cleanest and most convenient forms of energy, with the largest range of applications. Electricity has also had significant influence on the quality of human life.

The special physics of electricity makes electricity different from ordinary commodities/services. It is important to clarify this point that - despite the importance of economic factors (prices and costs) in the process of generating and supplying electeicity - electricity, as electrons in the wires, essentially move largely free from economic factors. Electric current in the wires does not follow demand-side willingness in favour of purchasing a particular source of electricity (e.g. renewable electricity vs thermal electricity). In a physical sense, electricity flows in the wires on the basis of certain physical rules such as _Ohm's Law_ and _Kirchoff's Laws_.

Meanwhile, electricity is being demanded not for its own sake, but for providing specific final services such as mechanical movement, lighting, cooling, or heating and so on. For this reason, the electricity demand is usually called a derived demand. This implies that the demand of electric appliances, which produce those final services, dictate the electricity demand. In addition, electricity is not easily storable and therefore, as a product, can not be physically separated from its transportation, which is a service (see Hunt & Shuttleworth 1996). Thus, electricity requires a real-time supply for every unit of its demand. All these characteristics make electricity a special commodity. 

Further, electricity as an industry has some special peculiarities. For long time, there was a general consensus among economists that the electricity industry is a natural monopoly and, hence, it was believed that the normal market mechanism is not applicable for electricity as a commodity. ‘An industry is a natural monopoly if total costs of production are lower when a single firm produces the entire industry output than when any collective of two or more firms divide the total among themselves’ (Newman 1998, p. 603). This implies a condition, which competitive market fails to operate and, hence, formation of a monopoly becomes a natural outcome of a unconditional competition (see Sharkey 1982). It is only in recent decades – after the emergence of what is called Distributed Generations – that this belief for the generation function of the industry has been changed, while the transmission and distribution functions are still being considered as natural monopolies (Hunt & Shuttleworth 1996).

Another peculiarity of the electricity industry is associated with environmental concerns of society. In the process of electricity generation, in most cases, electricity creates negative environmental externalities such as emission of greenhouse and other hazardous gases (for example, CO2, CO, NOx and SOx), particularly in fossil-based thermal electricity generation (IEA 1999). The aspect of negative externalities, however, is not limited to fossil-based electricity (generated by coal, oil, and gas). Even renewable-based electricity generation (green electricity) is not fully free from negative externalities. For example, although being free from the emission of greenhouse gases (that is CO2), large hydro-electric dams may cause negative impacts on the ecosystem and wild life. In the case of wind turbines, unpleasant noises and visual pollution are often considered as negative externalities of wind farms for their surrounding environment. The challenging problem in these respects is that under the current institutions (culture, regulations, and accounting systems), none of these externalities are well reflected in the cost functions of electricity generation. Therefore, social costs (for example, the costs people have to pay for medical treatment as a result of diseases caused by environmental pollution) are often neglected. This is the main reason behind the fact that many fossil-based thermal technologies are considered less costly as compared to many environmentally benign renewable technologies, while they are not necessarily so if one take social costs into account (see, for example, Fathollahzadeh 2000). 

One should also keep this in mind that standardisations of voltages and synchronisation of frequencies in the electricity network are very crucial conditions for having a reliable electricity supply. Such standardisations – being technical conditions – are required to be in place as social conventions. 

Special characteristics and peculiarities of electricity as a commodity/service have significantly contributed to the importance of electricity industry and its critical roles in modern economies. The more developed an economy is the more reliant that would be on its electricity industry. These peculiarities have always influenced the structure of the industry over time and have contributed a lot in the changes that have taken place in the industry.

### History of electricity in Australia[^1]

In Australia, as elsewhere, the electricity industry was not founded until key principles and understanding of electromagnetism (connection between electricity and magnetism) were discovered.

The electricity industry in Australia is often considered to have become in 1888 with the electrification of Tamworth, NSW. Although some applications, such as telegraph, telephone and electric lighting via arc lamps, had all been introduced prior.

In the early period of electricity through the 19th century, there were no specific standards for voltage, frequency of the type of electricity. Most generators were located close to consumers and there were no transmission lines as such. Technically, interconnection between multiple sources of generation was not possible in those days. By the mid-1910s, state governments and major municipalities began to take series acrtions towards the electricities.

Between 1914 and 1944, electricity demand started to slowly increase and electricity started to be seen as more of a necessity than a luxury. State governments began to realise the development potential of electricity and started to pass laws to regulate the industry. Two different types of ownerships were observable: in NSW and VIC, the industry was largely handed over to the public sector, while in SA and WA the industry remained under private ownership. Both QLD and TAS moved their industry to the public domain in the 1930s. 

After the end of WW2, the reconstruction efforts resulted in the establish of massive electrification programs around the world. In Australia, new waves of immigration and a general wave of nationalisation underpinned the rapid development of the electricity industry.

Due to the increasing returns to scale of the electricity industry at this point in thime, most research and development was directed towards larger-sized designs for generation and transmission. During this period (1945-1985), many large hydro and thermal plants were designed and constructed - for example, the Snowy Mountains Hydro Electric Scheme (SMHES). The SMHES is also the first reliable inter-state interconnection in Australia, and resulted in the adoption of 132 and 330 kV levels for transmission.

During the 1970s two major oil shocks in 1973 and 1979 raised concerns around energy security and the role of states in energy supply. Oil had been one of the main fuels for the electricity industry (albeit, not in Australia) and is largely non-substitutable in certain sectors, such as transportation. By the early 1970s, serious concerns also emerged about the environment and ecosystems.

In the late 1980s and early 1980s, there was a push for strategic development programs at the federal level, in particular to attract resource development. Heavy investment in electricity projects in the early 1980s occured to back up ambitious resource development programs, such as aluminium smelting. However, coupled with a period of growing interest rates, this lead to huge increases in the real average costs of electricity - and ultimately criticisms and debate on the efficiency of the industry.

The speed of institutional changes to public entities became more rapid in the 1980s and early 1990s, with Australian governments agreeing to launch a broader economic reform program in the early 1990s. Electricity reform became an integral element of the wider National Competition Policy (NCP).

The National Electricity market was designed on the basis of the UK-style model, with a significant role given to introduce competition and private ownership. The NCP emphasised efficiency gains through the creation of competitive markets. In order to comply with the requirements of the NEM, the Australian states which were party to the NEM began a phased restructure of their electricity industries in the early 1990s. The first phase, called NEM1, envisaged a commencement of operations in 1997 with New South Wales and Victoria as participants, and it was expected that South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania, and the Australian Capital Territory would join later (Sharma & Fathollahzadeh 2004). 

In this period, small-scale generators or distributed generators, especially Combined Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT) became practiable. This reduced the minimum efficient scale for generation. Further, decreasing IT costs reduced the costs of sophisticated metering and grid control equipment, which trigger the decentralisation of the electricity industry.



**Figure 1a: Timeline of key electricity events**
- **1863**: the first battery-operated electric arc light was installed at the Sydney Observatory as part of celebrations of the Prince of Wales' marriage (EANSW 1986, p. 1)
- **1867**: the first arc lights in Melbourne are used to celebrate the Duke of Edinburgh's visit (ETU 2004)
- 1870s: invention of early commercial generators (known as Gramme dynamos, named after Zenobe Gramme)
- 1879: invention of commercial incandescent lamps (simultaneously, by Joseph Swan and Thomas Edison) 
- **1879**: the first night-game of Australian football is played at the Melbourne Cricket Ground under electric light (Pyers 2001, p. 7) 
- **1881**: the first demonstration of electric light in Adelaide, SA (Linn 1996) 
- **1882**: the first demonstration of electric light in Brisbane, QLD using eight arc lights erected along Queen Street (Scholz Electrical Company 2004)
- **1883**: the first demonstration of electric light in Launceston, TAS which lit the windows of several shops (Read 1986, p. 9) 
- **1886**: Queensland Parliament becomes the first Parliament House in Australia to have an electricity supply (Scholz Electrical Company 2004)
- **1888**: 
    - Tamworth, NSW becomes the first electrified town (EANSW 1986) 
    - the first electric tram starts in Melbourne, VIC (RailPage 2004, p. 1) 
- **1892**: first electric streetlight erect and illuminated in Perth, WA by the WA Electric Light and PowerCo (Western Power 2004) 
- **1894**: The first city in Australia to operate a power station was Melbourne, where by 1894, most of the city’s streets were lit with electricity; twenty General Electric Dynamos supplied 3000 volts DC to a network of lighting covering sixty miles of street cables.  (Integral Energy 2004,
p. 2)& (ETU 2004) 
- **1895**: The first hydro-electric power station in Australia began operating on South Esk River in Tasmania
- __1896__: One of the first pieces of legislation, the NSW __Electric Lighting Act 1896__ which provided a right to the Council of Sydney to generate and supply electricity within the city area. 
- **1897**: one of the first applications of AC electricity in Australia was the power plant in Charters Towers, about 140km south-west of Townsville, QLD, and the second town in QLD ouside Brisbane to have electricity. 
- **1899**:
    - The first public power station in Sydney was established at Ultimo by Department of Railways and it began generating power for traction purposes (EANSW 1986, p. 1) 
    - The first electric tramways in Perth, commenced tram operations along Hay Street from East Perth to Milligan Street (Public TransportAuthority 2004) 
- **1912**: The first electric power application in Darwin for refrigeration purposes (Phelts 2004) 
- __1918__: Victoria established the panel of Electricity Commisioners to exploit the Latrobe Valley brown coal resources and return reliance on coal imports from NSW
- __1918__: the Electricity Supply Association of Australia (ESAA) was founded
- __1921__: Victoria establishes the SECV, taking over from the temporary panel of Electricity Commisioners
- __1937__: Queensland passes the __State Electricity Commission Act__ to constitute the State Electricity Commission of Queensland (SECQ), responsible for overseeing development plans for the electricity industry and advising Government.
- __1949__: construction on the Snowy Mountains Hydro Electric Scheme (SMHES) commences (and finshes in 1974)

**Timeline of key NEM events**
- __Jan 1995__: operation of the Victorian pool (VicPool), known as the Victorian Power Exchange (VPX)
- __May 1996__: operation of the NSW State Electricity market
- __May 1997__: harominisation of these two state pools
- __Dec 1997__: the intention of QLD to join the NEM (since when the term NEM has been used)
- __Dec 1998__: official operation of the NEM